Hi guys and welcome back.
In this lecture, we're going to look at string formatting.
In the last video, we saw how you cannot add
numbers and strings together,
but that is such a common thing to do
that all too often we end up having to convert the number
into a string so that we can add it to the string and so on.
Something like this,
which we had in the last video.
We've got a number, then we wanna put it
inside the strings so that we can show it to the user.
And we have to convert it into a string first.
This is quite annoying because it happens so often.
So instead, we can use string formatting.
So what I'm going to do is instead of printing
you are plus the age,
we're gonna print f-string.
Now an f-string is only something available
in Python 3.6 and above,
so make sure that you are using that version.
And if you don't know what I'm talking about,
don't worry, it will work in Repl.it.
And here we're going to do you are
and then inside a couple of curly braces,
we're going to type age.
Now we can delete this one here
and we can also delete this one there.
And we can directly print the number 34 inside our string,
because of the way the f-strings work.
So in an f-string, you type an f,
then the quotation marks.
And then inside the quotation marks
you can write these curly braces
and inside the curly brace you can write your variable
that you want to include inside your string.
Let's look at another example.
Here we've got a name and then you've got a greeting
which is an f-string.
You see the f, then the quotation marks,
and inside it you've got how are you, comma, space,
then you've got your curly braces
and inside there you've got the name of variable
and at the end you've got a question mark.
If we print this greeting and then we run this,
you'll see that how are you, Jose?, gets printed out.
It is a small problem with "f" strings
which isn't really a problem as much as a limitation
which is that if you change the name say to Bob
and then you print greeting again,
you'll see that how are you, Jose?, gets printed out twice.
That is because when we calculated the string,
the name variable was Jose
and that is what the greeting string contains.
The greeting string contains how are you, Jose?
and even if you change name, the greeting doesn't change.
That is why Python has another way of formatting strings
which does allow for the changing of variables.
So, let's delete these and create a final greeting
which is how are you
and then just opening and closing curly braces
without a name of variable inside it
and notice that this is not an f-string.
Now we can do another variable
that is final greeting dot format
and pass in the name.
So this is a little bit different
from what we've been seeing up to now.
What this does is it takes in this string here,
how are you comma curly braces question mark
and then, it's going to run
something called format inside it
and format has these brackets at the end
which means they can accept a value
and the value is accepting is the name.
What this does is it takes the name
and it replaces the curly braces by the value.
So, if we print jose greeting,
then you'll see the same thing as before, how are you, Jose?
But now you can do something like bob greeting
and make it equal to final greeting dot format
of the name Bob and then we can print that out.
So, as you can see, if we change the name to Bob,
then this line actually looks exactly the same
as the one above, but the name is changing.
So, what we've got here is essentially template
for the greeting and we can then replace the value into it
later on if we want.
Inside final greeting here,
you can also put name if you want,
but because it's not an f-string,
Python isn't going to try to put your variable
inside the string.
You must do it yourself, but if you put this in there,
what you have to do is
final greeting dot format
and now say name equal Jose.
So what this does in Python is Python will know
to look for the name thing inside curly braces
and replace it by Jose.
So this is a very important part of how Python works
and we will look on it in greater detail as we go along.
But the first part before the equal,
Python will know that is this thing here
and the second part is what you want to put there, instead.
Now here comes the confusing part which is that
you have a variable called name,
so really you can do name equal name.
But these to refer to two completely different things.
The first one, Python knows you refer to
this thing here inside your greeting
and the second one after the equal,
Python knows that you refer to your variable.
Don't feel like you have to use this all the time,
but it is there and you can use it if you want.
Well, the key benefits of doing something like this
is that the template is now much more readable,
because it is obvious that you are going to print,
how are you and then somebody's name.
In addition, it of course, works
if you change this variable name.
Name which is still being used inside the string
is now equal to friend_name which is our variable,
so this still look works in the same way.
Let's revert to that.
And now remember that name is going to be replacing
just the curly braces,
because we don't have anything inside them
which is when we need to say name equal something.
Instead of creating a variable called jose greeting,
you can actually just put this inside the print function
and that is totally fine as well.
It's a little bit more confusing maybe,
but it works in the same way.
Usually, you will be using f-strings in Python
just because they are shorter, they're more readable,
you don't have to type like dot format and then brackets
and then pass in things there.
So, f-strings are the weapon of choice.
But sometimes when you want to reuse a template
using format, comes in handy.
But that's it for this video,
I hopefully I haven't confused you too much.
Thank you for joining me and I'll see you in the next one.